--
layout: post
title: "Book Review: Claire of the Sea Light by Edwidge Danticat"
--

## Book Review: Claire of the Sea Light - Edwidge Danticat

Claire of the Sea Light begins in the guise of a fable: a father giving away his daughter to a wealthy woman. The father is Nozias, a widower fisherman in rural Haiti. The daughter is Claire, who is unsure she wants to go. And the wealthy woman is Madame Gaëlle, whose own child died several years ago. Claire is to live with Gaëlle while Nozias searches for better work. At first, they appear to conform to the archetypes of fairy tale: Claire, the abandoned child; Nozias, the loving, soon-to-be-absent father; and Madame Gaëlle, the remote, wealthy benefactor. The conjunction of omens on day of denouement adds to the myth-like atmosphere: Claire’s birthday matches Gaëlle’s daughter’s death day, and the day opens and closes with drownings in the same location. Short, precise descriptions of people, places, and things have a storybook quality, where clarity of action takes precedence and language does not call attention to itself. One chapter in, though, the narrative abruptly shifts: it is ten years earlier, Madame Gaëlle is pregnant, and all the town’s frogs are dying, likely due to a fungal infection. Claire of the Sea Light, it turns out, is not a fable about Claire at all, but is instead about how different perspectives can produce very different impressions of the same place and course of events. 

The novel plays with perspective at several levels. The town where the story takes place, Ville Rose, is etched from every angle: from the sea, from its overlooking lighthouse (built by Madame Gaëlle’s grandfather), from its surrounding mountains, in passing from the congested road leading from it to Port-au-Prince, in detail from the main drag, in the distance from the adjacent slums, in lamplight from boat-strewn beaches. Ville Rose at night, at dawn, at dusk, mid-day. A deeper sense of perspective comes from the supporting cast: each major character gets their own chapter, providing a distinct angle on the series of tragedies that drive the narrative forward. They span ages (child, adolescent, adult, aged), classes (poor, middle class, wealthy), gender, and sexuality. 

The same events, such as Claire’s climactic conversation with Madame Gaëlle about her, are shown from multiple points of view. Several characters retell events that have already occurred via different mediums: a letter from Nozias to Claire explaining why he must give her away, a radio-show story where a former maid, Fleur, provides a confessional about her tenure as maid for a local family of account. Their versions of these stories conflict, and each version provides key information missing from the other accounts. What in one person’s story is a random act of senseless violence in another is a grief-driven act of revenge. The composed exterior of one character is shown later to conceal a scalding rage. A father perceives his son as a disappointment while others view him as a success. Characters become multidimensional by virtue of being seen from many angles. 

The existence of the novel itself is an homage to seeing things from a different light: Danticat emigrated from Haiti to the United States as a teenager, and the book captures her native country through her eyes after decades living elsewhere. Perhaps tellingly, most of the characters in the novel do not think much of those who have left Ville Rose and Haiti. The author’s own history of having been left by her parents with relatives for 10 years before she followed them to New York clearly may have inspired her depiction of Claire’s state of mind as she prepares psychological for a new life. 

Ville Rose’s own history provides the context that shapes the way the characters interpret the events unfolding around them. In consequence, much of the narration is spent in memory: Nozias remembering his late wife and her job as a mortuary assistant, a young man thinking about the time he spent with his friend before leaving for Miami, a radio host pondering her affair with a schoolteacher. The history of Haiti itself is embedded in Ville Rose: the decayed castle built by Napoleon's cousin in the early 19th century, widespread deforestation causing floods that sweep coastal houses away, the decay of law and order after the reign of the Duvaliers. Danticat doesn’t give us explicit biographies of her characters but rather reveals the past off-hand by way of the associations things bring to mind for members of her cast. One event reminds them of another, then of another, and another in turn. This layered approach compactly builds psychological depth. The cost of this depth of vision is a certain lack of narrative momentum that is, perhaps, inherent to most books structured as connected short stories. 
